I remember thinking at the time, wouldn't it be in the way that way, so it wasn't a great thing for the world.
It was almost like I didn't notice anyone who did not know.
I too discovered that my idea was not a novel.
And in my friends who called us a novel, it was something long ago.
But unless I'm wrong, and I, very well believe it, know that you had an athlete until about six months ago.
I'm not that clear in the exact details, but I was a member of the living that we had found such close to have missed over my career.
Her response was not learned exactly, but as we mentioned, she had been discussing the very opposite of the character at the home.
Carmody Alcino, a productive book dealer, and a mutual friend of hers, told Karen and I had that we provide financial support to help get the organization off the ground.
That, I think, was a spark that started fire.
We agreed early on that the Board of Education was not able to see this part of the church, and that it was a hurry to bring in the plumbering of the institutions.
We also agreed that the new management did not be used to see the impact of our railroad work, that we should invite the children to the collectors to join the same table.
My discussions with Karen and her discussion led to a meeting on Tuesday, the 26th of February, about an improvement in the Railroad Department of Boston Public Health.
Ten teams of the first group have been named in the society.
You'll hear, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group, the first group,
From 2009, he called it, and Tom Harkin, who got lost to the values of the BDL and showing how he's the first three years ago.
I don't know if he had a result of that.
I mentioned he was a butterfly.
I sensed that he could be up to around the field of Bobby and Dr. Walker, but we were able to get to all the company.
I don't know about the others, but I was watching when they had my life back in my life.
On the new call 13th meeting, covered in the Caldwell Library on March 12th, the organization has been made of the club first meeting.
We all feel welcome to our newest, and our most illustrious, in Berkeley, our first-selling author, John Cain, who by the way, agreed to be honored to be seated.
The Society was named to honor the work here in 1791, 1797, and commonly lost a collector, scholar, and wilder reporter, and his daughter, and I know you took your pay to the court in three and two, and gave me a lot.
Who was really a member of the vast library of Massachusetts Life in Michigan, 1789, and their country's largest state of blackberry.
This explains the name of the organization.
But it wasn't the purpose.
The purpose is not for some big, for some people.
Though, for the competition, we of course hope that people will open up the membership.
But the part of the fear we need to take the society to stay.
We believe that this isn't a big enough to build a foundation for our lives.
In fact, we should invite our listeners to see if you need to join us.
So, Wayne P.O.D.
is a non-art documentary society.
Our purpose is to provide many of the book collectors, of P.O.D., of learners, artists, printers, publishers, writers, and lovers of books that we need.
Meet, share, and socialize, and listen to it with papers, and to spread the truth.
In short, our purpose is to promote supporting the books in our country.
We are delighted to join in for the paper society's first meeting, and the whole meeting of life, and the whole meeting of the nation.
So I think that I have a way of understanding how the universe can be, and what is part of the process of the body.
I happened in one of those early meetings, happened to have rarely said, oh, it's no problem for me to open a bank account.
And so I got chosen to be the person to handle the finances.
And thus far,
There are 40 paid-up members, and despite having $10,000 for mailings, we have $1,017.45 to the bank.
And if you do some calculations, you may wonder how we got that much with 40 members.
And it's not that I have some magic way of making money from class.
It's that there have been a few people who have contributed very much more of that community.
that $20 membership dues.
Those of you who have not paid dues and who may wish to do so will be given an opportunity after the last year.
Peter is going to tell you about the next meeting of this site.
Hear about your next meeting before this, have your friends.
The next meeting, the Orphan Dational Meeting of the Tricker Society, will take place on Wednesday, June 26th at Mass Street Historical Society.
The Historical Society is located at 1154 Boyleston Street.
The meeting will be at the same time, but we will have a reception first, and every time we want a chance to assemble, there's a Red Sox team that evening.
And also, we hope by applying to some degree that we can make a business part of the program as painless as possible.
While there is some real business to be done in getting this organization going, we thought we needed to entice you with more than something to drink.
So that means we'll have to reach from our three persons who are knowledgeable about the tips that they're looking at.
Sally Swager, a professor at Harvard Graduate School of Education.
She received on Hannah Elliott-Hickner, and she provided and encouraged studies at home, which she founded in 1873, New York, and 9-year-old.
Peter Arcaro from the Hope Library.
She received on George Hickner from Brooklyn.
And Ken Carpenter, a former member of the sort of, a founder of the sort of fiction, until recently one of the key ornaments of the Harbinger, who's deepened the role of the Tickner's in the founding of the public library, and the free public library commission of that.
In order to make it all Tickner's all the time, for that reason I plan to show you some of the exorbitant sides of the current firmness between young George Tickner and Thomas Jefferson.
I only have to do one thing to get off.
I hope that you need to know what you're doing.
Hi, I'm Ms.
Sylvia Bellis, and I've been asked if you lose my time at the invitation to be the speaker.
Nick, as probably most of you know, is the author of The Densighting Book on a Global Connection, a general manager, which is now in the state of the country called the WTI of the Constitution.
He has a book out of now, page 42, over 32,000 copies of these.
If you haven't read either one, I recommend him highly.
He's spoken to book collection books all over the country.
He collects stories.
from these groups of people in the world and including them in the book about the whole calendars and the calendars of culture.
He has a new book coming out, Among the Judges Mads, which will be published in November, and it will probably feature more than one person.
The next is to work on all of our time and this is to take this aside and actually do the first and the first one, just the third one and the second one and the second one and the second one.
Thank you very much.
We don't have a microphone, but if you want me to speak up, please just yell out.
I would be more than happy to do my level best.
I want to thank David and Tom and Ken and Peter.
Boy, that sounds like a double play combination, doesn't it?
From David to Tom to Ken.
And of course, Priscilla as well for this wonderful and brief thank you very much.
I specifically reflected a brief introduction.
Thank you very much.
You did call me the chronicler of the book world.
I like that a lot.
Ruth Conti, my wife, was with me.
And I were down in Chattanooga, Tennessee about two weeks ago giving a talk down there, and there was a big piece in the local paper that proclaimed the arrival of the king of the bibliophile.
And Conti said he's impossible enough to live with as it is.
Now he's going to be totally inseparable.
In Chattanooga, I was the king of the bibliophile.
In Charleston, South Carolina, I was introduced as the energizer bunny of the book world.
That was kind of fun.
Morgantown, no, Huntington, West Virginia, three weeks ago, was the Johnny Appleseed of the book world.
And that's kind of fun, because Johnny Appleseed is from my neck of the woods, and he really did sow the seeds, of course, of apple culture, I guess.
And if I could go out and speak my gospel of book culture,
That's a wonderful designation.
I won't dwell too long on the designation of me by Larry McMurtry of the New York Review of Books as the Rickshaw Cooley of the book world, trotting my leaders from this library to this collector to this wherever.
If anyone knows what that was all about, let me know.
I think maybe I should have trotted my rickshaw down at Archer City, Texas, but anyway, I didn't get there.
What a great, great honor it is for me to really be here among kindred spirits to give this inaugural presentation of the Tickness Society.
We are gathered in this library in the spirit of fellowship and a common denominator for all of us in books.
Regardless of our backgrounds, our professions, our institutional affiliations, we are all here this afternoon because we have this shared passion.
The spirit of this organization begins, I think, with what the late Lawrence Clark, Clark Powell, wonderful, that'll throw you off track.
The great librarian at the University of California, Los Angeles, over a three to four year period, he augmented the collections there from 395,000 volumes to 3.9 million volumes.
But he always said that everything he did, he began as a librarian in the Los Angeles Public Library.
He also worked with Jake Zeitlin, the bookseller.
He was a collector.
He was a writer.
All of these marvelous things.
And he said he called this the trinity of book collector, his interest.
He called it the trinity of book collector, of bookseller, and librarian.
To which I would add, of course, the many book people that have been mentioned here
bibliographers, bookmakers of every persuasion, printers, binders, type of files, of course, readers.
I think, of course, the final analysis was what do all book people ultimately work for is to be a reader and to serve readers.
As I said, Larry Powell was quite a book person, and I think that he would certainly be one of the first supporters of a picnic society.
In my view, also, a fellowship of books is also a continuum.
My rallying cry in this respect is a privilege of praise from Shakespeare's Tempest, the very words that are inscribed above the main portal of the National Archives of Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C., to which what is passed is prologue.
I'm sure that at some point in the future, and I certainly know because we've just been told that in our very next meeting we will be having a number of detailed presentations on the Tickney and George Tickney,
Anna Elliott Tickner, and I won't attempt the year of Anna here, but 1886, I guess, is the year that she passed away.
That's a very important year.
But I do think that I would like to just speak very briefly, just briefly, trust me, I won't pinge on anyone's turf here, just why we, I guess, in our deliberations, why we came up with the name Tickner for this society.
Whether we're having these preliminary talks or a number of worthy suggestions put forth for a name worthy of this organization,
We thought briefly about the 19th century collectors George Livermore, Edward Cromenshield, and Nathaniel Schritlett.
We liked Stephen Day a lot, of course, the first printer whose press was not far from here.
But we settled on George Tickner because it seemed like he touched all the bases.
And there was the added dimension, of course, of his daughter, Anna Elliot Tickner, a pioneer in the effort to educate women, a founder of the society to encourage studies at home, and an early member of the Massachusetts Library Commission, the nation's first touch organization.
This is a quote from David Tyak, who wrote a wonderful book called George Tickner in the Boston-Burman University of Harvard Press, 1967.
He wrote that in the cause of culture, Anna proved to be as public-spirited and well-organized as her father.
She also wrote a book for children anonymously, published periodically, called An American Family in Paris in 1869, in which she wrote nostalgically a wife abroad with a particularly gigantic but all the same delightfully agreeable father.
As for George Pickner, let us note that he was a historian, he was a teacher, he was a collector, he was a benefactor.
His books became a major collection at the Boston Public Library.
And above all else, he was a person who believed in the primacy of books in a civilized society.
During the 15 years he spent at Harvard, 1820 to 1835, he was an outspoken advocate of change, proposals, I might add, that pretty much fell on deaf ears while he was here, but which were largely implemented afterwards by a nephew who became president of Harvard University.
Not only do we have a scholar of the first rank, we have a pioneer in the public library movement who chose full support behind the formation of the Boston Public Library.
He served on a committee that investigated its feasibility and is credited with writing most of what is now regarded as the seminal document in the public library movement.
It's peddled upon the objects to be attained by the establishment of the public library published in 1852, just two years after his monumental history of Spanish literature.
I'll just read one little blurb from that, and then we'll go along with the Fellowship of Books.
He had always been for a library that would involve the people, I think he was right there, the public.
25 years earlier, he had made proposals to open up the Boston Athenaeum to try and amalgamate a number of the libraries in Boston, in the Boston area, but always at the forefront where the books would circulate and that they would acquire books.
This sounds like such a...
an obvious thing to be propounding today, but not so much then.
And when, in fact, I believe in 1849, 1840, in the early 1840s, John Jacob Astor gave $400,000 to establish a library, a purportedly public library in New York City.
But what was left out of the equation was that books could circulate.
Kittner always wanted to have books that could circulate
and to buy books and think of it.
But there was one category of books that he said that we absolutely have to buy for this new Boston Public Library.
He described them as books that few persons will wish to read, and of which, therefore, only one copy will be kept, for which should be permitted to circulate freely.
And if this copy should, contrary to expectations, be so often asked for as to be rarely on its shelves, another copy should then be bought.
But this whole idea of buying books that no one wants to read,
Another really pioneering concept.
When Ken Carter was showing me, when we were working on Patience and Fortitude, and Ken very wonderfully took me around on the rounds to widen the library, how he selected books to go off to off-site storage at the Harvard Depository.
We're in a Harvard building now, so I will get appreciative now.
When I give talks around the country, I say, are there any Harvard graduates here in the room?
You'll get one or two hands.
And I will say, did you know that you had a campus in South Florida, Massachusetts?
They never know that there's a Harvard campus 20 or 30 miles from here.
And on those grounds, of course, I have the Harvard Depository on the one side, and the Monkies for the medical school on the other.
And I won't get into the sense of man and the absence of man here, but there are facilities there we hope for the future to store 20 million books.
But the point is how you select books that need general circulation, especially when they go into a facility that faculty and students aren't allowed to go into.
So how are you going to find the books that you need?
Well, these are all very, very important considerations.
And Ken was telling me that when he was buying books for the Kress Library, there were times that he would buy books that had not been read in 200 years.
He said, I know this because they were uncut.
It didn't matter to me if it hadn't been read for 200 years and if it wasn't read for another 200 years.
The important thing is that Harvard has to have that book.
Well, here we are taking in these concepts 150 or 60 years ago by George Ticker.
Well, I will leave the discussion in particular for the next meeting, but I would like to just have one little point to make on the real bonus of selecting him as the namesake for our group, and that's his book place.
You know, when you've got your little invitation, and I was going through the group here trying to get the correct pronunciation for the Latin.
I'm going to tell you, everybody, we have to brush up on our Latin skills here, but I do believe it's Suu Kui Kui.
Kui Kui, is that right?
S-U-U-M-Q-U-E, C-U-I-Q-U-E, for which has several translations.
Thank God for Google.
Let each have his own or to eat his own.
To eat his own.
You can think, again, about the philosophy of George Pickler and wanting to really create an institution which everyone was welcome to.
What a wonderful, wonderful motto that is for an organization.
I went through two volumes.
of Chickmer's letters and journals published in 1876.
I think it approaches 2,000 pages.
I won't suggest that I read anywhere near all of these letters, as I could not find in there anywhere why he selected that particular phrase for his motto for his book play, but I think it's pretty accurate.
I thought when I saw that particular phrase,
of a word that I learned when I went up to Mount Athos in 1998, while I was researching my book, Patience and Fortitude.
Mount Athos, of course, we went active and public in Northern Greece, and I wanted to really see a tradition of preservation of manuscripts over a thousand years.
So obviously, you go to Mount Athos.
But there was a wonderful word that I read across called ideorhythmic, and it described a form of...
monasticism no longer in favor of the person.
I'm a Greek-American.
You can understand why the Greeks are like a form of monasticism where people can kind of follow their own way.
The word loosely translated means living by one's own life patterns.
It's nicely consistent, I think, with the principles maintained by Mr. Tickner and by this society.
Well, by way of background, and of course, as I said, what is past is prologue.
My immersion is an author of books about books,
A book delving into the affairs of this community and my community under Cambridge and Boston and New England began right here in 1988 with an attempt to describe what I then rather glibly called 1,200 years of book collecting in Greater Boston.
1,200 years.
How do you get that?
350 years at Harvard, I guess you could start.
200 years at the Massachusetts Historical Society.
175 or so at the Boston Athenaeum.
another 175 or so at the AAS, out of my neck of the woods in Worcester, 150 at the BPL, and a few other places, and we'd come up with 1,200 years.
That's kind of fun.
Why in the world would I want to do something like this?
Well, in 1988, it began in Philadelphia.
We have a lot of Philadelphia connections here.
It was a wonderful exhibition, and it gave us a gift.
Library Company of Philadelphia, in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Historical Society, curated by the late Edwin Wolfe, some of you might remember Eddie Wolfe of Marvelous Fed, who, with John Flanning, was the author of the great Rosenbach biography.
He was the librarian at the Library Company.
Just a marvelous bookman.
And Eddie curated this exhibition called Legacies of Genius.
And what it was, essentially, was a gathering, a selection of the literary masterpieces,
I guess I hesitate to use the word high spot because that word really doesn't suggest it to some of the wonderful treasures that were brought together.
But the concept of pulling together all of these many, many wonderful objects from the libraries and museums in the area into one exhibition, that was a smashing show.
And I remember saying to Eddie Wolf, gee, do you think we could do something like this up in Boston?
And of course he winked and he said, well, it's hard to do it all by themselves if I wanted to.
You wouldn't have to do it, but it gave me the idea to write a magazine piece, which I proposed to Bostonian Magazine.
I forget the title.
I mean, my idea was 1,200 years of collecting a Boston piece.
And they brought the piece.
And I do remember reading, as I always do to my wife, which is when I'm writing, working on things that I really care about.
I read aloud.
She's a write-up critic.
I remember starting right here, at least
and the Houghton Library, or the room where the Keats, the Keats Room is, looking at the life mass of John Keats, and then kind of moving my readers across the Charles Sylvester's Historical Society, and up to the Boston Athenaeum, getting some idea.
And I'm reading it alive in 2015.
Yeah, don't waste this story.
I'll never write a book about it.
I have to say, she says, this is the book you were going to write.
Well, I did write the magazine piece, and I submitted it.
And did you know they took out that lead, which is just as well with me, because I did finally use it in what became the idea to write this book that I chose, I think, in a moment of pure inspiration to call A Gentle Madman.
That was a book that always had a title.
Of course, as you mentioned that I worked in Worcester for 50 years.
I told you to keep it short.
I was a book editor out in the Worcester area for a number of years, and
one of our great, great libraries out there, the American Agiquarian Society, founded in 1812 by the great patriots, bookseller, printer, everything to do with books of the late, of the revolution of the early federal period, Isaiah Thomas.
He did all these marvelous things, but what we really remember him for today is this library that was formed with his book collection, and which in fact he came
what I contend is a uniquely, certainly if not unique, but by all means distinctively American institution, which is the research library that has really no connection whatsoever with an educational institution, but which was founded and established and nurtured by a book collector, the American Aquarian Society of the First.
Now there's the Pierpont Morgan Library, of course, the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, the Huntington Library in San Marino, the J.C.
Brown Library,
from the University of Clemens Library at Ann Arbor University of Michigan, on the campus of the University of Michigan.
In every case, it's a book collector that began and whose eccentricity is at the core of creating this great library.
We also have one in Philadelphia, by the way, the Rosenbach Library, which is not only put together by a collector, but also a bookseller.
I would have to say that's unique.
Is there any other library or museum that was established by a bookseller?
I'd be curious to know if anyone has any nominations to know.
Absolutely, but that's within the last couple of years.
Excellent.
Well, there you go, another bookseller.
When Isaiah Thomas died in 1831, he was in his late 80s,
His grandson, Benjamin Franklin Thomas, said in great tribute, his grandfather was afflicted at the earliest of ages with the gentlest of infirmities.
He was a bibliomaniac.
And I remember being totally charmed by that particular description of him and saying, there's the title for my book, This Gentle Madness.
And the underlying premise of the whole thing was not just, again, it started with institutions.
How did we make the leap from institutions to book collectors?
Well, of course, as Priscilla mentioned, I like stories.
I like to do things through narrative.
At every turn, I mean, where you go to the Massachusetts historical society, you run into Jeremy Belmer.
You want to look at the Boston Public Library and the forebear there.
There was the great Prince Library that came over there.
Well, Prince is another.
Thomas Prince is a fabulous character.
Well, Isaiah Thomas, as I already mentioned.
stories to be told, Jeremy Delnap, literally grabbing Paul Le Gere by the hotel and saying, sit down, putting a pen in his hand, say, tell us about that midnight ride, you know, write it down, you want to have it.
Every time I looked, there were these wonderful, wonderful stories and that realization that I could probably do something very, very interesting, using as the underlying premise that so much of what we know, so much of what we treasure, so much of what we respect and hold here of our
Literature, our history, our culture, we do owe in very great measure to book collectors.
Sounds like an excellent premise, I suppose.
But I was able to go out and find many, many instances where this happened to be the case.
I mean, I don't know how many of you have gone to the old British Library, of course, the new British Library, where you see that one display case at the center of the room where of nine items in there, five of them have the designation Cotton, Robert Cotton.
the day old manuscript which we would not have the great english ethic if it's not for a book collector robert cotton we wouldn't have sir gawaine and the green knight we wouldn't have pierre's diplomat we wouldn't have the linda sparring gospel if it's not for this book collector robert right here in boston i love this when i go and go to southern universities but i've been to tennessee and virginia you know the heart of the old confederacy and to tell these people that the the great confederate imprint collection by which all others are measured
The standard is right here in Boston, a couple of doors up from the Union Club on Creek and Hill in the Boston Athenaeum.
And, you know, they smirk and they smile and they say, that's not possible.
But then you look at it and guess what?
It's true.
Why is that true?
Well, Francis Parkman, as the Civil War is coming to a close, says, we have to do something.
We have to get some money.
We have to pass that old Boston hat, as he said, to grow.
And he gets $500 from the members of the Athenaeum.
That was a start.
He kicked in some money on his own.
He goes down south, or he sends his agents down into the Confederacy and gathers up, I believe it's something in the area of 5,000 imprints.
Now, I can't name you a single one of these imprints, and that's the beauty of an imprint.
We talk about ephemeral objects.
The extraordinary nature of this collection is the collection itself.
I mean, it's not one object.
I think if you were to take one out or add one in, it's not going to improve it.
damage it one way or the other.
What it is, it's a great collection that exists as a synergistic hole.
Well, there was another example of the book collector who was going out to preserve the culture.
It seemed like a pretty good premise.
I wrote up a proposal, sent it off, found an agent who sold it, lo and behold, in a very short period of time, a few weeks, and I was off to the races.
I was supposed to
Submit a manuscript in 18 months.
This was back in 1989, I guess it was.
Six years later, the book came out.
It was supposed to be 90,000 words.
The publisher was 250,000.
I wonder why I changed publishers along the way.
That's what I'm doing.
But a really very, very strange thing has happened.
I mean, I am, by training and background, a journalist.
I've done many, many interviews.
I've done a lot of investigative reporting.
For 22 years, I wrote a weekly book column of literary commentary.
I would interview a major author here in Boston, always end the interview by asking the author to describe my copy of the book.
So at one point, not only am I this book critic, I'm now becoming this book collector.
Because obviously, if you're going to go interview Arthur Miller on the time days,
you know and that's the only book you have i mean wouldn't it be who you get a death of the salesman you know first edition with a dust jacket right which i did and there actually is a number of popular books which i had in the sky i will tell you one key story i've told you a number of times which is always fun 1984 i believe it is i'm interviewing joseph heller in boston at the ritz-cartney's with the new novel it's called god knows
Lovely.
I enjoyed it.
I mean, it didn't get the greatest reviews in the world.
I thought it was fun.
And this was a really terrific man.
We were having lunch.
And towards the end, I said, would you mind inscribing a couple copies of your books for me, of your books for me?
He said, no, I'd be happy to.
And he goes with the first one, God knows.
And then he said, too bad you don't have a first edition of Catch-22.
And really, too bad you don't have one with a dust jacket.
Of course, that was before I opened up my briefcase.
Went through the Catch-22 in a beautiful dust jacket.
And he was a very savvy guy.
He said, maybe you just want him to sign that.
Or what are you saying in a very gentle way?
Maybe my name in there would deflate the value of the book.
It really mattered perhaps with his signature.
My feeling on this was, you know, the value to me is personal, not monetary.
I would rather have an inscription.
So what Helen then wrote into the book was something like this.
For Nick Basdames, who treasures his first editions,
I only wish I had a first edition copy of this book.
Well, you know, I thought he was kidding, but he was going through what we call a domestic crisis at the time.
The books were not with him, shall we also say.
Jump ahead now, 18 years or so.
Six months or so, I jump ahead to the publication of Gentle Madness in 1995.
I'm interviewed by Brian Lamb on Book Notes.
I tell that story.
Now I jump ahead two years, and I interview Joseph Heller again.
Again, Aaron Bart.
And the first thing he said to me, I saw you on Book Notes.
I said, really?
He said, I love it.
You are terrific.
Well, this was his Coney Island memoir.
I give this book to him to inscribe, and he writes in there, Renick Bansbane's great collection of Joe Heller, and I still don't have a person who...
Now, when a bookseller tells you that a signature is better than an inscription, you tell me.
If I had just asked for that signature back in 1984, I mean, I'd have a nice book.
It would be worth something out there, I guess.
But would I have that story?
I mean, would I have this?
Everything for me is narrative.
Everything is storytelling.
The book collecting is storytelling.
This book that Priscilla mentioned, which is forthcoming this fall, Among the Gently Mads.
one of the points i make is this very point right here i mean would you rather have a signed book or a book that has a nice long inscription in there what would you rather have a letter from somebody or an article for myself i always feel that more is better
Well, what am I suggesting?
At some point into the research for this book that was going to talk about the history of book collectors and how they helped save our culture, it occurred to me, you know, the light flashes off over my head, you know, I do have skills as a journalist.
I can do interviews.
I like to think I can tell good stories.
I'm a very good investigative reporter.
What somebody has not done, to my knowledge, up to this point, and has not been done since then, is to have a
Somebody go out and write about the collectors of the here and now, the great living collectors, not just the great collectors through history.
So to go back to that word that I used earlier, how this fellowship of books is not only a fellowship of book people, but it is a continuum, but it's past this prologue.
So after having written what I thought was a pretty nice, overture section of book collecting, through a very selective look at book collecting, I really got into
what I think was the departure for General Madness, which was to go out and to really box the compass, as it were, not just geographically, although I did do this geographically, but I think in terms of economic ability to collect.
I mean, I maintain every great bookseller will tell you this, that book collection, and I think every book person will agree to this,
Book collecting is an exercise that you can enjoy at any level.
I mean, you can be the richest person in the world, and you can be wealthy.
And if you can afford $6 million, if one collected it up, they made the Berlin Sale in October for the first photo of Shakespeare.
And I'll cut it a little square about that.
If I could have been, you know, great.
She's got the $6 million.
If I could afford to pay $3 million.
I was actually asked that question on C-SPAN again.
a report.
We were talking about this sale, the Burlans there, which I write about when patients imported to them.
And then we had the books out there.
We had the Blake Signs of Innocence.
We had the first folio.
We had the two volumes of Johnson's Fictionary.
We had a number of really wonderful, wonderful books.
But the reporter said, pointing to the Shakespeare, why in the world would somebody pay $3 million?
But this was the estimate of one of the things before the sale.
Why in the world would somebody pay $3 million for a text
that anyone can download for free on the internet.
You know, think about that.
Why would somebody pay a million dollars for this little book?
He's talking about the plate, the timing of the book, as if size had anything to do with it.
This is, I think, one of two or three exclusive copies of The Sons of Venice.
It's made by Blake lovingly.
Every Blake, of course, as we know, had totally supervised every aspect of the bookmaking process, not only having written the poetry, but having
as he executed the artwork, making the book stick in your hand cover.
It's just a work of art.
It's an iconic object.
I remember putting my hand on the Shakespeare of the famous ocean engraving facing the title page and saying, well, you know, if you think that
Nothing in Shakespeare's hand, other than six autographs, three in his will, three elsewhere, comes down to us in his hand.
And if you also accept the fact that of 36 plays in this book, fully 20, never appeared anywhere else prior to their publication in 1622 in this book.
And these plays include The Tempest, they include Macbeth, Antony and Cleopatra, a number of really great plays.
And if you are, as I am, consider myself an acolyte of the altar of Shakespeare, and if you put your hand on this book, and if you realize that this is as close as I can ever come in an artifactual way to the genius of Shakespeare, then yeah, if I have the three million dollars, why not?
I'd love to have it.
It would be wonderful.
Well, the timing of this particular sale was two weeks after the attack on the World Trade Center in the Pentagon.
This was two and a half weeks.
This was still in October.
And there were a lot of misgivings about whether or not they should have this sale at all.
Of course, the president and everyone else of high standing in the country were saying, we have to go on with our lives.
We have to continue.
Great advice.
And so Christie did have the sale.
And the Shakespeare didn't sell for $3 million, as I just said.
It went for $6.2 million.
So you talk about, well, there has to be something to be learned out of that, don't you think, that it has two wits?
I mean, if there is something that two people really want,
And if the book and only one of them can have it, you know, I don't think that there's anything going to stand in the way of that happening.
Well, I went out, like I said, I boxed the compass geographically.
We certainly covered New England.
I went to Florida.
I wrote about a wonderful woman down there who had a great collection of children's books, 200,000 of artists at the University of Florida.
I love telling this story in the South.
The only problem was that when she gave these books, children's books,
18th, 19th, and 20th century children.
She came along with the collection.
It wouldn't allow anybody to use them as long as she was alive.
And I tell the story in General Madness how during the spring lunch, this young student who was trying to get into a fraternity goes over to the library and asks if he could possibly see
Ruth Baldwin, Dr. Baldwin is the Ruth Baldwin woman who put together this collection.
Can I possibly speak with Dr. Baldwin?
He was told that the woman, unfortunately, relatively sadly, had just passed away.
He was sad, he was relieved.
He said, you know, he just told you the woman has just passed away.
Why are you so relieved?
He had been ordered by his fraternity to go over to the library and ask Dr. Baldwin if he could read some of the books.
But, you know, when you think about
Of course, Raymond Teague was telling you that he was down there at the University of Florida when he did the interview down there.
He said, you know, what we have now is one of the great collections of children.
So you do put up with these little things with collectors.
You know, we talk about the eccentricities, the extraordinary foibles that they have.
But in the final analysis, you have the cycle of collectors.
You have the cycle of institutional collectors.
These are all these dynamics that I was trying to write about.
Also boxing the compass in terms of gender, as I mentioned.
You know, for years there's been this horrible libel, but women hated books.
I mean, I'm not saying this, read the General Baptist.
Read some of the people who, well, William Blades, who wrote the enemies of books, I mean, rank women up there right below children.
And dust in them, and water, you know, fire.
Well, I thought that it was important not only to find one or two extraordinary women who collect books, but half a dozen, eight, nine, ten.
I mean, just kind of blow that thing out of the water if you can.
I also wanted to box the compass in terms of race, so therefore I had to go out and find somebody like Charles Watson.
Charles Watson was a great football player at Pennsylvania State University back in the 1950s.
who had an ironclad, no-cut contract to go play football with the New York Giants.
His roommates were Lenny Moore and Roosevelt Greer at Penn State.
Rosie went to the Giants, Lenny Moore went to the Baltimore Colts.
And Charles had this contract, and after one week, he walked away from the New York Giants.
And of course, I later interviewed Lenny Moore, and I said, what did you think he's like?
Charles, you're crazy.
He thought he was really nuts.
Why in the world would you walk away from a career in the 50s?
You talk about a black kid coming up in the 1950s.
Never mind the 1950s.
How about the 80s or the 90s?
If you have this chance, you see this.
And what Charles said, I walked away because I wanted to be, I had to be a black bibliophile.
Those were his words.
That was his expression.
I was growing up in Pennsylvania in the late 40s, early 50s.
He was told by a primary school teacher when he asked, why is it that when I read history books, I never see any mention of black people?
And he was told by the teacher that that's because black people have no history, Charles.
They were born to serve white people.
Now, this is not an apocryphal story.
When Charles later was given a commendation by the state of Pennsylvania, this teacher showed up and publicly apologized.
This is a true story.
But he said, if that's the case, what are all these stories my grandparents and my great-grandparents have been telling me about the underground rills, all of these extraordinary tales, folk tales that have passed on?
Well, he determined at his very early age, he was broke, he would go to the Salvation Army where they would have books for 25 cents and hide the ones he wanted, you know, until they had their nickel and dime sales.
He put together a library that is now 80,000 lawyers at the Temple University, and it is, I believe, one of the four.
great Afro-American collections in the United States.
Of course, the great one is in New York, the Schaumburg Library.
We have a great one here at Harvard, and another great one in Washington, D.C.
at Harvard.
But those, you'd have to say, and the Bloxham collection at Temple.
Well, Charles was somebody we wanted to write about.
Then I also wanted to attend the great options.
I was very, very lucky with it.
The Bradley Martin sale and the Seldo Heaney sale was going on.
A library called the Guyton Library that was put together here in Cambridge.
I attended that sale and wrote about that.
I wrote about all of these particular sales in the sixth chapter of Gentleman.
So therefore, with the collector, I wanted to move into, stay within the realm of book culture.
And we come along now to patience and fortitude.
We are in Boston, so I don't expect all of you to realize that these are the names of the lions that stand in our
in front of the New York Public Library on 5th Avenue and 42nd Street in Manhattan.
So named during the Great Depression, when Ciarello LaGuardia would get his Sunday night radio broadcast, and unfairly he would, and this was during the Depression, he would always say, what we need to see us through is a great ordeal which lay ahead on him to exercise the twin bridges of patience and fortitude.
Prior to this, the wonderful Tennessee Pink Marble, the Lyons,
have been called Lennox and Astor, I guess.
Judge Jacob Astor and James Lennox.
The names attached to these lions.
Well, I love the idea of lions that are named Patients and Fortisers, and the idea of lions as a metaphor, as an image, guardians of knowledge, guardians of the gates of knowledge.
What a wonderful image, what a wonderful metaphor to have at this time, during these times.
And libraries, the whole institution of the library,
I hesitate to say under attack, but I mean, we had book people here.
You know what I'm talking about.
You know where we're coming from on this.
I mean, I write about libraries and patient support as an institution that was established in Florida in 1995, a state university at Fort Myers, Florida Gulf Coast State University.
The founding president said, I mean, this is on record.
He's very proud of this statement.
He said, I want an institution with a library that is no larger than a telephone booth.
As it turns out, he did hire a librarian from Brandeis and did get him 120,000 books from Uppsala College, which went bankrupt a few years ago.
He's very fortunate.
And they do have a respectable library.
I say flat out in that chapter,
I make a declarative statement.
Today, the finest colleges and universities in the United States are still measured to great extent by the depth and sophistication of their libraries, their print collections.
I try to give you stories that document this whole concept.
I did not, in patience and fortitude, forget my collector.
I didn't leave the collector, but I didn't forget the collector.
Chapter 3 of that book is called Madness Redux.
Abel Burland is one of the collectors in there.
There are six collectors in there.
People say, well, how come you didn't have these six people in General Madness?
Had I known about them at the time, they would have been there.
They certainly deserve to be in there, but they are also what I
I like to think of as scholar bookers, people who not only collect their books, but use their books, know their books.
Collecting books are the purpose that is beyond just merely decorations and curiosities in a library.
I also have a chapter that I call Hunters and Gatherers, about scholar booksellers, human booksellers, because they were developed by the co-files in that particular chapter.
So it's this whole culture, this whole concept of the fellowship of books, this community of book people.
Now, I did bring along with me today a few visual aids.
I've never done this before, but I only live out in that time.
In fact, I don't know if I was going to be schlepping this thing from the heart of the garage.
I wouldn't have carried it, but I don't know how many of you are familiar with A Gentle Madness, but Chapter 13 is called the Blumberg Collection.
That is, for those of you unfamiliar with Stephen Blumberg, let me just say briefly that he was a collector.
It is kind of an ironic title.
He got a collection of 23,000 books gathered from 368 libraries in 45 states, two Canadian provinces in the District of Columbia over a 20-year period.
22,000 books.
Some estimates were that the value was up to, could have been as much as $20 million.
Then there were other estimates of $7 million, but I think that was a way he served.
When you saw the Nuremberg Chronicle that he had from Claremont College and its original pink, pig-skinned, blind-stand findings, I think the estimate was $100,000.
He had the state of Connecticut's own copy of the first book printed in Connecticut, A Confession of Faith, which he moved from Connecticut State Library.
To this state, nobody knows how he got in there.
This is a library that does not circulate.
I don't even know if you can go in there and read, depending on the truth.
Somehow, Stephen got in there.
While he was there, getting the confession of faith, he had some friends traveling with him.
He sent them across the street, one of the visual ways, to get some doorknobs up to state capitals.
They also had 50,000 doorknobs.
This is one.
He gave them to me.
I'm trying to carry this on an airplane today.
You can carry it.
When I attended his trial in Des Moines in 1991, a two-week trial, I got to know Stephen fairly well.
I'm the only person today who has had any interview with him.
I'm the only journalist who has allowed him the secret warehouse that the FBI had put together
handle these books, to process these books, and to return them.
Did I mention that 95% of these books were never known to be missing until the day they were discovered?
An interesting point, because he had removed all the book plates, you see.
He hadn't really defaced the books otherwise.
He took very good care of them, but he did remove the book plates.
He put the book plates in three stop-locks.
Prosecution next exhibit, number 12, is this.
I only had a lot of plates with scrapbooks.
He had these three scrapbooks, a collection of 1,200 book plates.
There was a collection that was in the collection.
I told my friend Martin Antonini, the steward of the team, he was a books librarian at Smith College, and I said, Nick, did he ever hit here?
We never knew whether or not he'd gotten in store.
And I have the book here.
I emailed, I said, Mark, I hate to try to do it, but there are six, let's book play for me.
But don't feel so bad because Amherst College is on the facing page.
Mount Holyoke is in the next page.
Amherst is there.
Then he crosses the border.
He goes across, he goes into New York and he hits Cornell and he goes down to Bard.
These are the most extraordinary things I do.
So he's selected quickly.
These are four that I like.
These are very unusual.
These are Stanford University Library book places.
And I have them here.
I have three of them.
I will read you what these are.
These are very, almost in theory, if you see them.
Because he put them together in a way that documented his travels, the way he traveled around.
And this one, I mean, he's cooking like antique books.
But he wrote, put a little sticker in here.
And these are his drawings here.
But it says, a hungry man who steals a piece of beef to save his life is called a common thief to save his life.
A thief much commonerly often finds and rubs on our bookshelves to improve his mind.
Improve your morals, inconsiderate elves, and then your minds will soon improve themselves.
I think we've gotten a joke about that.
I acquired these quite legally, quite legitimately.
Probably 23,000 books which he removed from these libraries.
About 3,500 could never be determined where they came from because, again, he had taken out the book plate.
At one point during the seven-hour tape recording interview that I had with him, he said to me, Nick, shut off your tape recorder.
And I said, OK.
He was holding out this chip, you see, his knowledge of where all the books had come from.
And he said, you know the Uncle Tom's Cabin they think I got from Harvard?
So there were still 3,500 books that they could never determine where they came from.
The FBI did give those books to Creighton University, which had assisted them in trying to determine where so many of these books came from.
It was quite an interesting exercise in what we might call forensic bibliography.
I know Roger Stoddard of Harvard went out there and looked and determined, well, we know
that we used a certain kind of tape at Harvard, for instance, but other libraries don't.
So they were able to identify books, and of course the fact that they were missing some of the books that they later determined were there.
But these were turned over to Creighton, and then Creighton sold a number of the books that they were interested in to the bookseller, who contacted me and said, the one person in the world who thought could have these was me.
proud owner of them, and if anyone would like to look at them, you're welcome to afterwards.
I just asked if there are a number of loose book plates in here.
He was arrested before he had a time to stick them in, but they are where he left them, so if you see some... I gave a talk at the Aquarius Society, there were peasants
I would hear these shrieks going, oh no!
You know, a fellow from Ontario, oh no!
Two book places!
Stephen would, uh, the book would be thrown off, you see, this particular, I'm sorry, I'm not supposed to laugh, he's in prison.
No, after a librarian here, I should point out that, uh,
He was convicted, by the way.
His defense was not guilty by reason of insanity.
Now, if you have a book called The Gentle Madness, you know, a fellow that's stolen 23,000 books, and his defense is not guilty by reason of insanity.
That's a pretty interesting story.
Well, I'm supposed to be writing about the positive aspects of bibliomania.
Now I've got this data.
368 library well i like to think that excess you know is always destructive that the collector who goes over the cliff can be a very very interesting person um he took me to his warehouse i should tell you about the warehouse when the court was in recess in des moines he asked me if i'd like to spend a day with him and i did indeed and we went down to watumwa where he had been arrested
the city where Radar O'Reilly's M.A.S.H.
fame was from, and where Stephen had decided he wanted to set up his great library.
Look at the map, you know, it's the middle of the country.
He still had five states to go by the time he was arrested.
They intended to get all 50.
It really bothered him that a fellow by the name of God... My goodness, I can't think of it.
Who was a great book thief before they arrested Stephen?
The man who's escaping... No, not Hoffman.
I can't think of the name right now.
It'll come to me afterwards.
But this guy was being...
He was touted as the great book thief of the 20th century.
He was driving Stephen nuts.
He wasn't getting the recognition he was.
I really believe he wanted to be arrested.
He was pleased to be arrested.
He was delighted in the notoriety.
He was convicted.
He spent seven years in prison.
He was let out.
He was told, don't go near any of his libraries, bookstores, museums, or condemned houses.
Those four things.
Condemned houses, you say.
when he was growing up in the Twin Cities of Minneapolis.
This is how this thing starts.
He was one of the most knowledgeable people I know of in antiques, American stained glass windows, corn-outs, fixtures.
He would go into all of these condemned houses.
This is how we got started.
He would go in and pull out corn-outs like this, fixtures.
He gave me one of these.
It's a memento of our day together.
And he did ask me.
He said, would you like a memento of my day together?
I said, well, I'd love one.
But it is stolen.
And he says, I'm only charged with books.
You know, not to worry.
So I took it, you know, with the understanding that I wasn't receiving stolen property.
When I did get back to Des Moines, I checked with the FBI.
He said, don't worry about it.
We're only charging with books.
So you're unclear on that.
But his goal, he said, was to create this great reference library, this great reference library of Americana.
I said, well, how does that explain the 100 incunables that you have?
Books, as you know, that are more than 500 years old, printed in the dawn, the infancy of printing.
He said, well, you know, collectors, once we get started.
He had 100 incunables which he kept in the California room in his house.
So named because that was his favorite state for hunting, as he said.
He told me the story of climbing up an elevator shaft at Claremont College at night, and all of a sudden the elevator started to come down.
He didn't get anyone in there.
Imagine getting killed climbing an elevator shaft to get a book.
He went into burning buildings once to get books.
He used to disguise himself as a professor.
He got the ID of a professor at the University of Minnesota.
He moved to California and assumed the identity of this man.
He told me, now I was able to elevate the level of my activity.
He was now confined just to the general stacks if you go to special collections.
He actually had stature.
He would arrive as a visiting professor with portfolio.
That's amazing.
He entered into evidence in addition to these three books.
You will understand I couldn't obtain these, but there were ten rings of keys.
keys that he had made.
He would come into a place like Harvard or Boston University or wherever.
I mean, perhaps as many as 60 or 70 keys.
I think more than that.
He was also a locksmith.
He would go in.
He would find the desk of the person he knew was in charge.
He would find the keys.
He would make a copy of the keys.
He would make copies of security keys.
He'd come back.
He knew the books that he wanted.
He said, I'm a collector.
I'm not an accumulator.
He made it very clear.
He was not an accumulator.
He was a collector.
And then when the FBI put the books in the warehouse, I said, well, what did you think when you went out to the warehouse and saw the books?
He said, well, they messed up my shelving, you know, my shelving.
And I said, well, Steve, don't you think?
He said, I know, I know, pro bonots.
He said, they have them all by pro bonots.
You wonder why you have to go out, and I'll conclude with this, why you have to go out as a reporter, as a journalist, as a researcher, even with all the internet and the searching capabilities, to go out and
I mean, I could have written that chapter on Bloomberg.
I had been to the trials.
Did I have to make a special flight out there?
Omaha and Alaska.
Nobody was allowed in.
The FBI was adamant I couldn't get in.
Finally, the day he was sentenced, they said, you can come, but you can only have 15 minutes in here.
I said, I don't know what you want to come out here for anyway.
All you're going to see is an old book, a library.
You know, the idea.
Well, I went out there, met under a...
flagpole and McDonald's resting.
He said, I'm not going to blindfold you.
I said, don't worry.
You don't have to worry about that.
He took me in.
Spent 20 minutes there, maybe five extra minutes.
I start that chapter.
It wasn't the book so much.
It was, again, the protonizer.
He said some signs that were on these steel shelves that really caught my attention.
There I say Harvard.
There I say Library of Congress.
There I say the University of Wisconsin, UIC.
And that was a great cultural offense, in my view.
You know, Stephen is kind of funny to talk about.
He's getting out of prison, by the way, on July the 3rd.
He got out five years ago, and the first thing he did was go to a condemned building.
I mean, he's caught stealing fixtures and doorknobs, and they gave him five years.
And every time he's supposed to get out, he was originally supposed to get out in October.
He was supposed to get out next week, May 28th.
I just checked with my detective client in Des Moines.
It's now been extended to July the 4th.
He keeps doing something.
to keep them in a bit longer.
Maybe they'll see me forever.
God knows.
Because prison has not been good to students, shall I say.
This is not a case where you have had rehabilitation.
I will conclude my remarks, but I can find it here.
Yes, I will.
I think the words of this final paragraph from the first chapter of my forthcoming book, Among the Gentlemen, is appropriate to the Tickness Society.
I'll just read this paragraph.
I say, as we embark forthwith on the pleasant task of sharing sea stories with the gently man, I am reminded of a volume of literary criticism that I keep on the shelf near my computer, not so much to peruse its content, which let the record show I beautifully did read when it came across my desk as a review copy of 1979, but to glance during idle moments on the wonderful title the writer Marvin Murdick chose for his essay.
A string of eight words and a question mark that express the sentiment I confess that I savor on a daily basis.
Books are not life, but then what is.
Thanks a lot.
I really appreciate it.
Thank you.
reflected that would be cool we could talk during the reception if anybody wants to look at the catalogs i have a brief uh announcement to uh to make before we get to the real pleasure uh the library started so we have no trouble getting